README.md, before:

# low_level_ros2 
The official Sorbonne University ROS2 repository for the CoVaPsy course at ENS Paris-Saclay
**When cloning this repository, please put it in the src folder of you workspace**

- [low\_level\_ros2](#low_level_ros2)
    - [General informations](#general-informations)
  - [Launching the car (for now)](#launching-the-car-for-now)
  - [Low level nodes](#low-level-nodes)
    - [Bolide Interfaces](#bolide-interfaces)
    - [Bolide Direction](#bolide-direction)
    - [Bolide STM32](#bolide-stm32)
    - [Bolide Teleop](#bolide-teleop)
    - [Sllidar](#sllidar)


### General informations
- Raspberry Pi 5 (RPi5) - OS : Ubuntu 24.04
- ROS2 Jazzy
- Repository for [Hig-Level nodes](https://github.com/SU-Bolides/high_level_ros2)
- [Official repository of the race (for schematics)](https://github.com/ajuton-ens/CourseVoituresAutonomesSaclay.git)
- [Repository of last year (2024)](https://github.com/SU-Bolides/course_2025_slam_pkgs.git) : There is the main branch in ROS and the ROS2 branch prototype

**Check the [tutorials](Tutorials.md) if you need some extra infos.**

Be prepared every time you start the car. Avoid plugging the battery if you don't want to test something with all sensors and motors, batteries take time to be charged up. You can work on the RPi5 alone or even work on your personal computer (or VM if you want absolutely to try with a ROS distro) thanks to GitHub. If the simulation is up to date, you can even work with it at home to rapidly check if a logic in your node is working.

Please, talking of GitHub, use it correctly ! Commit every change to keep a track of your work and easily go back if needed. By working with GitHub you can easily set up a new RPi if needed.

**You are a group so work together**, be sure that everyone are following your plan and not doing everything that they want. You will normally have two cars, it means that you can divide your group in two little groups and work on something different to be faster. The race comes really fast so at the beginning you need to fix what you want for it.

## Launching the car (for now)
Every packages (except bolide_interfaces) are build with symlink so you need to change code only without building them every time, except if it is on a new RPi.
**Never forget to build on your workspace folder and not your src folder !**
When the car is on, connect with ssh (you have to know its ip address before), or branch it to a display. Normally we add some lines in the .bashrc file so when you open a terminal it will be automatically on the workspace folder and all sourced up. If you need to source after a modification just type :
```shell
srcw
```

On the terminal check the connection of all USB devices (Lidar and Dynamixel) with :
```shell
ls /dev/ttyUSBU2D2
```
and :
```shell
ls /dev/ttyLIDAR
```
if you see them, it's all good, else check the connections.

Now on the terminal type to launch the teleoperation :
```shell
ros2 launch bolide_teleop teleop_keyboard.launch
```

You will be able to move the car with the arrows of your keyboard.

If you want to launch the wall follower:
```shell
ros2 launch bolide_wall_follow wall_follow.launch.py
```
For more details please see [this](https://github.com/SU-Bolides/high_level_ros2). (work in progress)

## Low level nodes
This repository contains only the low level code for the car and a simple teleop package. Please use this [repository](https://github.com/SU-Bolides/high_level_ros2) to add some high-level packages like PID process, SLAM, or data processing.

Normally if we're brave enough, we will try to add a README to all packages, so if you want to have a better explanation of a point try in its folder or code.

For every node we created a debug parameter, it is initially set to False, by changing it to True in the source code or in a launchfile you will see some useful data print to the terminal (like value of speed or direction, the sensors data). Like its name, it is for debugging when you want to see some informations. 
When printed we use the method node.get_logger().debug("message"), this method will add the message on a log file somewhere on the RPi5, to see it on the terminal we change the logging level of the node ! **For more info, please read [this]()**

### Bolide Interfaces
The [package](./bolide_interfaces/) containing all Messages and Services created for the car. For now, we only use the ForkSpeed message for the fork data and MultipleRange for the infrared sensors, the messages are :
- **ForkSpeed** composed of a header and a float32 value corresponding to the speed measured by the fork
- **MultipleRange** composed of 3 Ranges (from std_msgs). One for the Rear left Infrared sensors, one for the right and the last for the Sonar (not used for now)
- **SpeedDirection** composed of two float64 values, one for the speed of the robot and the other for the direction. Both are between -1 and 1.

To access in a python file, you need to import the package (e.g from bolide_interfaces/msg import SpeedDirection)

**If you want to create a Message or a Service for the car please put it in this package and this package only**

### Bolide Direction
The direction of the car is controlled by a Dynamixel plug with a U2D2 connector to the Raspberry Pi. The package [bolide_direction](./bolide_direction/) have a [node](./bolide_direction/bolide_direction/cmd_dir_node.py) subscribed to a Float32 message, and send to the dynamixel the angle value needed. The angle is limited by the turning mechanism of the car, so we set a maximum steering angle of 15.5 degrees. To facilitate the process, the direction value is include in [-1, 1].
The U2D2 port is dynamically connect with the port /dev/ttyU2D2 so you don't need to change the DEVICENAME after every reboot of the car.
**If you want to add this dynamic connection on a new RPi5, please see the [tutorials](Tutorials.md#create-a-dynamic-connection-for-usb-devices)**

### Bolide STM32
The STM32 is the micro-controller connected to the rest of the sensors and the propulsion motor.
The list of sensor used:
- IMU, an 9 DoF accelerometer, gyroscope and yaw sensor used to know the acceleration and turning angle of the car.
- Two infrared sensors to check if there is obstacle behind the car
- A optic fork to determine the speed of the wheel and its sense (forward or backward)

The list of sensor we don't use now but are included:
- A Battery checker to check the voltage of the battery, it seems that it is broke
- A ultrasound sensor, another way to check if there is a obstacle behind the car and its distance, but not used for now

The reception of the sensors data are in the [stm32_node](./bolide_stm32/bolide_stm32/stm32_node.py) and also on specified topics for every type of sensors.

The micro-controller is also use to send the PWM to the propulsion motor. The [cmd_vel_node](./bolide_stm32/bolide_stm32/cmd_vel_node.py) node is a simple node sending the desired PWM value. We send it a cmd value $\in[-1, 1]\cup{2}$ where:
- $cmd = 0$ is the neutral mode, the car is on free wheel and will not stop immediately
- $0.02 <= cmd < 1$ is forward
- $-1 < cmd <=-0.02$ is backward
- $cmd = 2$ is brake, here the motor will block the rotation of the wheels

**AVOID TO USE 1 and -1 as value, it will decrease the voltage of the RPi5 and shut it off**. To fix this problem we'll need to add a second battery (one for the motors and the other for the RPi5 and other stuffs).

The [stm32_node](./bolide_stm32/bolide_stm32/stm32_node.py) receive the PWM value and will send it to the motor by the D9 pin (if you want to check the voltage value). The PWM value will after be read by the ESC that will send it to the motor. If you think that the ESC is not working correctly please use the [esc_setup.py](TODO file code) code to set it up and read the md file to follow correctly the instructions. TODO

When the ESC is set-up you will need to find MINSPEED, MAXSPEED, MINSPEEDFORWARD, MAXSPEEDFORWARD. Since there is two cars, maybe this value will be different for both of them ! So these values are parameters easy to change on launch. Maybe a better solution exists.

### Bolide Teleop
This package is for controlling the car manually. For now there is a simple keyboard [teleoperation](./bolide_teleop/bolide_teleop/teleop_keyboard.py) where you can use the arrow of your keyboard to move the car. If you want to add another teleoperation node with a controller or something else, put it here.
The teleop with the keyboard can be tricky when passing from forward to backwar. To pass from forward to backward you need to press 'n' before, then press one or two times on the Key Down Arrow.
By doing a teleop with a controller (PS4 controller by exemple) we'll be able to use analogical values and the command will be smoother.

### Sllidar
This package is the official package for our lidar. We use here the sllidar_node to get the data of the lidar. It is a gt submodule, so after cloning the repository you'll need to type (**be sure to be on the terminal on the repository folder**):
```shell
git submodule init
```
Then:
```shell
git submodule update
```

**We never change this package, if you want to process the data of the lidar, please see if in the High-Level repository there is a package for the lidar or create your own package in it.**

To connect it use the dynamic link /dev/ttyLIDAR to assure the good connection.
**If you want to add this dynamic connection on a new RPi5, please see the [tutorials](Tutorials.md)**

Commit message:

add a graph for link between components

README.md, after:

# low_level_ros2 
The official Sorbonne University ROS2 repository for the CoVaPsy course at ENS Paris-Saclay
**When cloning this repository, please put it in the src folder of you workspace**

- [low\_level\_ros2](#low_level_ros2)
    - [General informations](#general-informations)
  - [Launching the car (for now)](#launching-the-car-for-now)
  - [Low level nodes](#low-level-nodes)
    - [Bolide Interfaces](#bolide-interfaces)
    - [Bolide Direction](#bolide-direction)
    - [Bolide STM32](#bolide-stm32)
    - [Bolide Teleop](#bolide-teleop)
    - [Sllidar](#sllidar)


### General informations
- Raspberry Pi 5 (RPi5) - OS : Ubuntu 24.04
- ROS2 Jazzy
- Repository for [Hig-Level nodes](https://github.com/SU-Bolides/high_level_ros2)
- [Official repository of the race (for schematics)](https://github.com/ajuton-ens/CourseVoituresAutonomesSaclay.git)
- [Repository of last year (2024)](https://github.com/SU-Bolides/course_2025_slam_pkgs.git) : There is the main branch in ROS and the ROS2 branch prototype

Here the link between every important components of the car.
![the link between every elements of the car](./images/diagramme_sensor_test.png)

**Check the [tutorials](Tutorials.md) if you need some extra infos.**

Be prepared every time you start the car. Avoid plugging the battery if you don't want to test something with all sensors and motors, batteries take time to be charged up. You can work on the RPi5 alone or even work on your personal computer (or VM if you want absolutely to try with a ROS distro) thanks to GitHub. If the simulation is up to date, you can even work with it at home to rapidly check if a logic in your node is working.

Please, talking of GitHub, use it correctly ! Commit every change to keep a track of your work and easily go back if needed. By working with GitHub you can easily set up a new RPi if needed.

**You are a group so work together**, be sure that everyone are following your plan and not doing everything that they want. You will normally have two cars, it means that you can divide your group in two little groups and work on something different to be faster. The race comes really fast so at the beginning you need to fix what you want for it.

## Launching the car (for now)
Every packages (except bolide_interfaces) are build with symlink so you need to change code only without building them every time, except if it is on a new RPi.
**Never forget to build on your workspace folder and not your src folder !**
When the car is on, connect with ssh (you have to know its ip address before), or branch it to a display. Normally we add some lines in the .bashrc file so when you open a terminal it will be automatically on the workspace folder and all sourced up. If you need to source after a modification just type :
```shell
srcw
```

On the terminal check the connection of all USB devices (Lidar and Dynamixel) with :
```shell
ls /dev/ttyUSBU2D2
```
and :
```shell
ls /dev/ttyLIDAR
```
if you see them, it's all good, else check the connections.

Now on the terminal type to launch the teleoperation :
```shell
ros2 launch bolide_teleop teleop_keyboard.launch
```

You will be able to move the car with the arrows of your keyboard.

If you want to launch the wall follower:
```shell
ros2 launch bolide_wall_follow wall_follow.launch.py
```
For more details please see [this](https://github.com/SU-Bolides/high_level_ros2). (work in progress)

## Low level nodes
This repository contains only the low level code for the car and a simple teleop package. Please use this [repository](https://github.com/SU-Bolides/high_level_ros2) to add some high-level packages like PID process, SLAM, or data processing.

Normally if we're brave enough, we will try to add a README to all packages, so if you want to have a better explanation of a point try in its folder or code.

For every node we created a debug parameter, it is initially set to False, by changing it to True in the source code or in a launchfile you will see some useful data print to the terminal (like value of speed or direction, the sensors data). Like its name, it is for debugging when you want to see some informations. 
When printed we use the method node.get_logger().debug("message"), this method will add the message on a log file somewhere on the RPi5, to see it on the terminal we change the logging level of the node ! **For more info, please read [this]()**

### Bolide Interfaces
The [package](./bolide_interfaces/) containing all Messages and Services created for the car. For now, we only use the ForkSpeed message for the fork data and MultipleRange for the infrared sensors, the messages are :
- **ForkSpeed** composed of a header and a float32 value corresponding to the speed measured by the fork
- **MultipleRange** composed of 3 Ranges (from std_msgs). One for the Rear left Infrared sensors, one for the right and the last for the Sonar (not used for now)
- **SpeedDirection** composed of two float64 values, one for the speed of the robot and the other for the direction. Both are between -1 and 1.

To access in a python file, you need to import the package (e.g from bolide_interfaces/msg import SpeedDirection)

**If you want to create a Message or a Service for the car please put it in this package and this package only**

### Bolide Direction
The direction of the car is controlled by a Dynamixel plug with a U2D2 connector to the Raspberry Pi. The package [bolide_direction](./bolide_direction/) have a [node](./bolide_direction/bolide_direction/cmd_dir_node.py) subscribed to a Float32 message, and send to the dynamixel the angle value needed. The angle is limited by the turning mechanism of the car, so we set a maximum steering angle of 15.5 degrees. To facilitate the process, the direction value is include in [-1, 1].
The U2D2 port is dynamically connect with the port /dev/ttyU2D2 so you don't need to change the DEVICENAME after every reboot of the car.
**If you want to add this dynamic connection on a new RPi5, please see the [tutorials](Tutorials.md#create-a-dynamic-connection-for-usb-devices)**

### Bolide STM32
The STM32 is the micro-controller connected to the rest of the sensors and the propulsion motor.
The list of sensor used:
- IMU, an 9 DoF accelerometer, gyroscope and yaw sensor used to know the acceleration and turning angle of the car.
- Two infrared sensors to check if there is obstacle behind the car
- A optic fork to determine the speed of the wheel and its sense (forward or backward)

The list of sensor we don't use now but are included:
- A Battery checker to check the voltage of the battery, it seems that it is broke
- A ultrasound sensor, another way to check if there is a obstacle behind the car and its distance, but not used for now

The reception of the sensors data are in the [stm32_node](./bolide_stm32/bolide_stm32/stm32_node.py) and also on specified topics for every type of sensors.

The micro-controller is also use to send the PWM to the propulsion motor. The [cmd_vel_node](./bolide_stm32/bolide_stm32/cmd_vel_node.py) node is a simple node sending the desired PWM value. We send it a cmd value $\in[-1, 1]\cup{2}$ where:
- $cmd = 0$ is the neutral mode, the car is on free wheel and will not stop immediately
- $0.02 <= cmd < 1$ is forward
- $-1 < cmd <=-0.02$ is backward
- $cmd = 2$ is brake, here the motor will block the rotation of the wheels

**AVOID TO USE 1 and -1 as value, it will decrease the voltage of the RPi5 and shut it off**. To fix this problem we'll need to add a second battery (one for the motors and the other for the RPi5 and other stuffs).

The [stm32_node](./bolide_stm32/bolide_stm32/stm32_node.py) receive the PWM value and will send it to the motor by the D9 pin (if you want to check the voltage value). The PWM value will after be read by the ESC that will send it to the motor. If you think that the ESC is not working correctly please use the [esc_setup.py](TODO file code) code to set it up and read the md file to follow correctly the instructions. TODO

When the ESC is set-up you will need to find MINSPEED, MAXSPEED, MINSPEEDFORWARD, MAXSPEEDFORWARD. Since there is two cars, maybe this value will be different for both of them ! So these values are parameters easy to change on launch. Maybe a better solution exists.

### Bolide Teleop
This package is for controlling the car manually. For now there is a simple keyboard [teleoperation](./bolide_teleop/bolide_teleop/teleop_keyboard.py) where you can use the arrow of your keyboard to move the car. If you want to add another teleoperation node with a controller or something else, put it here.
The teleop with the keyboard can be tricky when passing from forward to backward. To pass from forward to backward you need to press 'n' before, then press one or two times on the Key Down Arrow.
By doing a teleop with a controller (PS4 controller by exemple) we'll be able to use analogical values and the command will be smoother.

### Sllidar
This package is the official package for our lidar. We use here the sllidar_node to get the data of the lidar. It is a gt submodule, so after cloning the repository you'll need to type (**be sure to be on the terminal on the repository folder**):
```shell
git submodule init
```
Then:
```shell
git submodule update
```

**We never change this package, if you want to process the data of the lidar, please see if in the High-Level repository there is a package for the lidar or create your own package in it.**

To connect it use the dynamic link /dev/ttyLIDAR to assure the good connection.
**If you want to add this dynamic connection on a new RPi5, please see the [tutorials](Tutorials.md)**
